@deffn {Function} {grid:map-n-grids} @&key sources destination destination-affi destination-specification initial-element element-functions combination-function combine-destination
@findex grid:map-n-grids
Map on multiple source grids.  The arguments are:
   sources:
     A list of (grid-or-function affi), each one representing
     either a grid or function from which data will be drawn.  
     If it is a grid, the grid values are used.  If it is a function
     of the appropriate number of non-negative integer arguments,
     values will be created by calling that function on the indices.
     If affi is not specified and grid-or-function is a grid, the affi
     will default to the @code{affi} of that grid.

@table @emph

@item    destination:
     A grid in which to put the results, or nil if one is
     to be created.

@item    destination-affi:
     An @code{affi} for the destinattion.

@item    destination-specification:
     A specification for the destination, if destination-affi
     is not given.

@item    initial-element:  Initial value to give to the destination grid.
@itemx    element-functions:
     A list of functions or nil, one for each source.  This function
     is applied to the source element before combination.

@item    combination-function:
     A function that combines each of the source values after
     being passed through the element-functions.  If nil,
     then just take the value from the first source.

@item    combine-destination:
     If true, pass as the first argument to the combination-function
     the prior value of the destination grid.  Defaults to @code{t} if
     :desination is specified; otherwise nil.
@end table

@end deffn
